>>REGINA MEREDITH: One of
our favorite interviewees,
Hank Wesselman, is back and
talking about shamanic healing.
As an anthropologist
working on some
of the most prestigious
archaeological sites
in the world, Hank entered
another more hidden world
over 20 years ago,
quite by accident.
This is chronicled in our
first interview with him.
As the years progressed, he
became a shaman and a healer.
In this interview, he offers
an extraordinary opportunity
for the Western
world to understand
how the shaman of the
world can heal people
of virtually every disease
known to man by including
the step of healing the soul.
>>HANK WESSELMAN:
Experiences that I
had in Hawaii back in the 1980s.
I was literally drawn,
kicking and screaming,
into the world of the
shaman, where I became,
in addition to being a
wandering anthropologist,
I became a kind of
wandering medicine man.
Now, in this
tradition, you remember
when we talked
about the shaman, we
talked about an
individual who was
able to achieve altered
states of consciousness.
There are different
levels of depth.
I mean, there's light trance
and there's very deep trance.
In light trance, the individual
can continue to function.
And in my case, I
found that I was
being trained by these folks on
the other side of the mirror,
as the Native American
people sometimes
refer to them, the
folks in the next room.
And I began to access
a body of knowledge
and a body of
information that directed
me to become a medicine man.
Now, in the shaman's
world, as you recall,
the shaman is the one who
achieves these levels of trance
in which they're
able to dissociate
their conscious awareness
away from their physical body
and enter into a non-ordinary
level of reality awareness
and experience in which
they connect with spirits.
The spirits of nature,
the spirits of ancestors,
spirits of animals,
plants, higher spirits,
angelic spirits.
These spirits are
essentially forces
which are poised just beyond
the boundary of this world
that we all take so
much for granted.
They're poised to help
us in various ways.
And from the
shaman's perspective,
they've been doing this
for a very long time.
Now in the shaman's
world, the shaman
has a certain
holistic perspective
which Western physical medicine
doctors don't tend to have.
At least not until recently.
For the shaman, illness
gains much of its power
and its meaning from
its spiritual aspect.
In other words,
everything in existence
has a physical form,
an energetic aspect,
and a spiritual form.
And the shaman is the one
who's adept at working
with the spiritual
aspect of the illness.
Because if the illness can
be diminished at that level,
it will diminish its
energetic expression,
which in turn will help the
physical body to restore itself
to a state of natural
balance and harmony.
So in the shaman's
world, the shaman
uses everything
at their disposal
in confronting illness.
And for the shaman, physical
medicine and spirit medicine
are like two halves
of a single whole.
The goals-- the purpose of the
practice of spirit medicine
and physical medicine are
somewhat different, however.
As we're all very much
aware, the primary purpose
of the practice of
physical medicine,
Western physical medicine,
is the avoidance of death
and the prolongation of life.
There's nothing wrong with that.
I mean, this is what Western
medicine is really good at.
In spirit medicine,
the primary purpose
of the practice
of spirit medicine
is to nurture and
preserve the soul.
And when your soul is in good
shape, you're in good shape.
>>REGINA: To create-- keep
harmony going within the soul.
>>WESSELMAN: That's it.
But when your soul is in shreds,
you've got a serious problem.
Now I might add
here that shamans,
in their essential role
as healers, you know,
if a warrior were brought into
camp with an arrow sticking out
of his body, that would not
be the time to grab the rattle
and go into trance.
We could say the same thing
about our own culture.
If somebody were in a
serious car accident,
and they were
bleeding internally,
this would not be the time
to go to your acupuncturist.
This would be the time
to find yourself alone
in a room with world class
surgeon, anaesthesiologist,
and medical team.
This would be the time
for physical medicine.
And all shamans know a great
deal about physical medicine.
They're good at it.
The spirit medicine comes later.
It comes later.
Now, it--
>>REGINA: Now, when you say
later, is that by necessity?
Or is it simply
how people normally
respond in linear
fashion to trauma,
that they start examining the
spiritual component later?
Are there not preemptive
uses of spirit medicine
so you don't have to
become out of harmony
and ill to begin with?
>>WESSELMAN: Yeah.
And that has to do with expanded
awareness and paying attention.
I might throw in that the
shaman is very concerned
with the relationship
between cause and effect.
They have to be.
You see, from the
shaman's perspective,
we come into life as embodied
beings and things happen to us
here on the physical plane.
As kids we fall off our bikes.
We get stubbed toes, sports
injuries, mumps, measles,
chickenpox, colds,
flus, and viruses.
And we could go down the list
of what happens to children.
Right?
As we mature into
adults, we continue
to have accidents in the
kitchen, get in car wrecks,
we get colds and flus
and viruses, all right?
Things continue to happen.
And some of us are unlucky
and we get serious illnesses
of an internal
nature like cancer
or lupus or heart
disease or HIV.
Eventually, we pass
through old age
and the progressive infirmity of
and death of the physical body.
These are all to be expected
as we pass through life.
But from the
shaman's perspective,
they're all effects.
And what the shaman is
interested in is the cause.
>>REGINA: And if I can just
interject a question at this
point, and I want you to
continue your lineage there.
>>WESSELMAN: Please do.
>>REGINA: When you--
it's not just individual,
it's also a collective
experience, so--
>>WESSELMAN: Yes,
there does seem
to be a resonance that exists
within groups of people,
and certain illnesses
become preponderant.
It may have something to do
with the spiritual field which
permeates and interpenetrates
certain social groups.
This is part of the mystery.
I mean, we don't really know.
We don't really know.
But we do see patterns.
From the shaman's
perspective, there
are three classic
causes of illness.
And interestingly, they're not
bacteria, viruses, or microbes.
They're states that we
move into in response
to traumas, as a rule.
Trials, tests, and
tribulations in life.
Now the first classic
cause of illness
from the shaman's
perspective is disharmony.
That's what we would
call it in the West.
Disharmony is a state
that we move into, usually
as a result of some sort of
catastrophic loss experience.
Like when you've
got an older couple,
and they've been married
together for 40 or 50 years.
And God knows they haven't
had a perfect relationship.
In fact, there
are times when you
wonder how grandma and
grandpa ever stayed together.
But deep down, there's this
incredible bond between them
because of everything
they've endured, everything
they've been through together.
And one night, one of
them makes transition.
Within six months to a year,
often, not always, but often,
the surviving spouse will come
down with something serious,
and they're gone.
We could talk about
somebody losing their job,
losing their livelihood,
losing their label,
their sense of
professional identity.
Let's take a corporate
executive, a CEO.
Let's make it a
woman, 50 years old.
One day, the good old
guys in her corporation,
they have a business
meeting, and they
decide they could hire
some hotshot right out
of business school for 1/3 of
her salary, so they let her go.
And she has a
lifestyle that goes
with her corporate
executive status.
Well, six months later, she's
still sending out her resume,
trying to get
rehired at her level.
And at her level,
that's very difficult.
Remember, she's just been fired.
Well, she goes for
her annual exam,
and she's given
the grim diagnosis.
She has cancerous cells in
her uterus, or in her breast,
or in her armpit.
Now, without claiming
anything supernatural here,
is it possible that her cancer
is a response to the disharmony
that she has moved into
in losing her livelihood.
The way in which
disharmony affects people,
is it diminishes them at the
level of their personal power.
When your power goes down,
when you've had power loss,
you're vulnerable to illness.
You know, I've noticed that
after I give one of my midterm
exams, you know, I
always have a bunch
of students who don't do well.
And inevitably,
they all come down
with the flu or
colds in response
to having had this kind of
trauma of seeing their grade
point average plunge in response
to one of my killer exams.
Now, disharmony.
The second major cause of
illness in the shaman's world
is fear.
Fear is not good for you.
Somebody who's walking around
with a chronic sense of fear
enveloping them, it diminishes
their sense of well being.
And that sense of well being,
that sense of being well,
is the foundation for their
personal health system.
When their sense of
well being goes down,
their immune system goes down.
The ability of their
immune system to function
is diminished.
And when your immune system
goes down, you're in trouble,
you know?
There was an
incredible case, this
was published in the
scientific press.
I think it was published
in the "New England Journal
of Medicine," about a boy who
was born at UCLA medical school
to an HIV positive mother.
This was back in the
late '90s, 95, 96, 97.
It's referenced in my
book "Spirit Medicine."
This boy was born HIV positive.
He was tested at 19 days of age.
And a month later, he was tested
again and he was HIV positive.
There was no question.
Now this was a special child.
So this child was
put into foster care.
I believe the mother passed.
He was put into foster care.
He went through
preschool, kindergarten,
and when he was
in first grade, he
showed absolutely
no signs of HIV.
So they tested him
again, and lo and behold,
he was HIV negative.
And they were able
to tell from the test
that the disease was not
lurking dormant waiting
to spring on him.
It was gone.
Now is it possible,
again, without claiming
anything, that this
boy's immune system,
lacking the fear that the
knowledge of having this dread
disease would
generate in one of us.
Is it possible that his immune
system simply went to work
and killed the virus
as it's programmed
to do by the evolutionary
software that's
programmed into these bodies?
But you know, it was Paracelsus,
300 or 400 years ago,
the renaissance
physician and alchemist,
who made the observation
that the fear of disease
is more dangerous than
the disease itself.
Because the disease
may or may not get you,
but the fear is going
to get you every time.
Now, for the Western physician,
it's no news to anybody
that disharmony and fear
can manifest themselves
as illnesses which
are recognizable
to Western science.
I mean, this is no news.
But the third class
of cause of illness
is the one which is
the most dangerous.
This is the phenomenon
which is known as soul loss.
Now, curiously, among
the indigenous people,
soul loss is regarded
as the primary cause
of premature death
and serious illness.
And it's not even mentioned in
our Western medical textbooks.
I mean, if you were to go to
your PCP, your Primary Care
Physician, and
said, you know, I've
had a terrible soul
loss experience.
What do you think
he or she would say?
Well, if you've got a
good one, right, he or she
would say, gee, could you
tell me more about that?
Listen, there are a lot of
medicine men and medicine
women in our medical system.
You just have to
find a good one.
Right.
Now, soul loss.
Soul loss implies damage to
our personal essence, our soul.
That essence of who
and what we are.
And this damage usually occurs
in response to serious trauma.
Now these traumas begin
the moment we're born.
For example, we could
have an incoming soul
who was born as a girl when
everybody was hoping for a boy.
And the whole family
just turns away.
Or it could be the reverse.
A family with four
boys, and here
comes a girl-- here
comes another boy.
And the whole family
just turns away.
The last time I spoke
with Stanislav Grof, who
was one of the fathers of
transpersonal psychology,
he talked about the fact that
he was deeply concerned, now
in his '70s, with perinatal
birth issues traumas
and how they set up that
individual's entire life
by what happened at the
time they were born.
>>REGINA: Which is
the kind of work
he does with the holotropic
breathing, right?
>>WESSELMAN: Well
that's part of it.
That's part of it.
But you know, soul
loss is what happens
to a child who is sent into
preschool or kindergarten
and who's traumatized
by their peer group.
Who is physically attacked, or
mentally attacked, or teased
and bullied, day
after day after day.
That's a form of
psychic assault.
Soul loss is what
happens to a child who
is abused or neglected.
Or you could say, to a
person who's molested.
Or an adult or
child who was raped.
Very often, the
trauma is so great
that the soul is totally
traumatized by what's
happening.
And the entire soul
will dissociate away
from the physical body.
And in response to the
trauma, it will often fission.
It will fracture,
and parts of the soul
will simply dissociate, and
they will remain disassociated,
often carrying the memories
of the trauma with them.
Now, you can see that this could
be a life coping mechanism.
You know, many of us remember
the Central Park jogger
in New York, the woman who
was so terribly brutalized,
attacked and raped, and she
was virtually unrecognizable.
She has no memory of that event.
I finally saw her
interviewed on television.
She had no memory of the event.
It's a classic
example of soul loss.
But you can also see that
remembering that trauma
would not serve her.
It would psychologically
traumatize her further.
So in this case, the soul loss
was a life coping mechanism.
>>REGINA: So how
does one go and begin
to heal that, knowing that
it's not in her best interest
to be consciously
aware of that event?
>>WESSELMAN: Well, we're
going to get there.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>WESSELMAN: But
let me just mention,
because I know this is
part of the teaching
that people find riveting.
That soul loss can occur in
response to a serious surgery.
Anesthesia is very
traumatizing to the soul.
It can occur in response
to a terrible car accident.
I can't tell you how
many people have come up
to me over the years
and said, you know,
I was a terrible car
wreck five years ago,
and I've never been the same.
It's like part of me is missing.
[SNAPS] Ding.
That's the key term.
Part of me is missing.
Or you'll have somebody
who was at a terrible,
for example, the car wreck
that happened in car racing
when Dale Earnhardt was killed.
All right?
People will say, part of me
left when Dale was killed.
You know, part of me is
still in that stadium.
I've just never gone back
and seen another one.
This kind of thing.
Or an acrimonious divorce.
A shocking betrayal.
For women, often a miscarriage
or a serious abortion,
a traumatic abortion,
can create soul loss.
And through my
wife's practice, you
can't imagine how many
people, how many women,
have told her of the soul
loss that they suffered
on the day they got married.
All right?
When one person
gives up their dreams
so that the other
person can live there.
Soul loss is what happened to
all those young men and women
we sent to Korea and Vietnam,
Operation Desert Storm, and now
Iraq.
The military calls this post
traumatic stress syndrome,
and they come home as
the walking wounded.
But in fact, this is soul loss.
And unfortunately, our
military doctors, the VA,
has no idea what to really
do for these people.
They have to restore the
fabric of their soul.
And our Western
trained physicians
are not trained to do that.
They don't really understand
the nature of this dynamic.
Now the symptoms
of soul loss are
very easy to recognize if you
know what you're looking for.
We've mentioned one.
Blocked memory.
When a person can not remember
whole parts of their life,
this is indicative of soul loss.
When somebody is
emotionally remote,
when there's nobody
home emotionally,
there's nobody to
receive the love
that you have to offer
them, or to give you
the love that you need.
Chronic negativity.
Somebody who is always
focused on the negative,
who's always down.
A sudden onset of
apathy or listlessness.
Suddenly life seems pointless.
Nothing is worth anything.
>>REGINA: Cla-- this
sounds like also a lot
of classic depression symptoms.
>>WESSELMAN: Despair, suicidal
tendencies, addictions,
all involve soul loss.
And the classic
symptom of soul loss,
you've just given it to
me; is chronic depression.
This brings up
something strange.
About 10 years ago, maybe
more, in the early '90s,
there was a Time Magazine cover
story on Depression in America.
Now I may have this wrong,
I believe it was called,
Prozac Breakfast of Champions.
You know, that was
Time's way of talking
in a glib way about a
very serious subject.
But that article revealed
that at that time somewhere
in the neighborhood of
60 million Americans
were taking antidepressant
drugs on a daily basis
to control their moods.
That's-- at that time, that was
roughly 30% of the population.
This reveals the degree
to which soul loss
is a very serious problem.
And of course, after 9/11--
9/11 was on a Tuesday.
On Friday, I remember
the ticker tape
going across the bottom
of my television screen,
saying 7 out of 10
Americans suffering
significant depression
in response to 9/11.
There's soul loss
on a national scale.
Now, the reason soul
loss is so dangerous is
that these vacant places
in the soul cluster,
in the nature of the soul, are
open invitations for intrusive
elements to come in
and take up residence.
In the shaman's world, illness
is regarded as an intrusion.
As something that comes in
to the body from without.
This is true in Western
medicine as well.
>>REGINA: Whether it be a
virus, bacteria, mold, whatever.
>>WESSELMAN: Viruses, bacteria,
you know, an arrow, OK?
But we can also talk about
negative thought forms.
Negative emotions, like fear.
These can be intrusions.
Now, when your soul is in
good shape, no problems.
No worries then.
All right?
But let's say you're
working in an office,
and you've got a coworker
who's jealous of you,
or envious of you.
Who is constantly
sarcastic with you,
constantly leveling
bad thoughts at you.
Always thinking bad
things about you.
Or you've got a set
of hostile in-laws
who never find you worthy.
Or a neighbor who's always
angry and vitriolic with you.
All right?
An ex who cannot let go.
And you're sitting
down at the Pizza Hut,
and suddenly you're
getting these weird vibes,
and you look over,
and then there he
or she is across
the room, looking
at you with this-- you know.
Now that's the modus operandi
of negative witchcraft
in a traditional society.
All right?
Those negative thought
forms and intentions
can be internalized like
spiritual poison darts.
And when your soul
is in shreds, when
there are these
great gaping holes,
these intrusive elements,
these negative elements,
can enter and take up
residence like guests.
Carolyn Myss, I talked to
Carolyn Myss about this years
ago when we are at a conference.
I think it was the Association
for Humanistic Psychology
Annual Conference
back in the late '90s.
She regards them
as energy circuits
that circulate within
your energetic matrix.
And of course most of our
listeners are aware of the fact
that your energy
body expands out
to about three feet on each side
around your physical matrix,
all right?
We actually live inside
of our energetic matrix.
Well, these negative thought
forms and intrusions,
or traumatic memories,
memories of something terrible
that happened, when we
turn in their direction,
it's like we feed
them, because energy
flows where your attention goes.
These circuits are
constantly drawing
from your available daily
supply of life force.
They're diminishing us at the
level of our power supply.
And if you continue to
collect these stones
in your bowl of
light, so to speak.
They diminish us on
a daily basis, 24/7.
Now, in the shaman's
world, healing
involves dealing both with the
spiritual aspects of illness
and with the
energetic expression
of those spiritual aspects.
So from the shaman's
perspective,
the very first
thing that you have
to do for somebody
who's suffering
is augment their
personal power supply.
>>REGINA: Let's go-- let's
take a consistent thing.
That woman who's 50 years
old who lost her job,
lost her sense of identity.
Let's talk about if she were
to enter the shamanic world.
Let's continue and
use her as an example.
And get something concrete.
>>WESSELMAN: All Right.
If that woman came
to me, you know,
I've been a shamanic
practitioner now for 24 years.
24th year of my
apprenticeship now.
And I've been teaching
for about 13, 14 years.
If that woman were to come to
me, the first thing I would do
is empower her.
That's the very first thing a
shaman will do for a client.
This is because healing
cannot take place
if you're in a
disempowered state.
It just isn't going to work.
You have to be in an empowered
place for healing to take.
So the first thing I
would do is empower her.
And the easiest way
to do that would
be to bring her into a
relationship with a healing
spirit or spirit helper.
A spiritual helper who'd be
willing to channel power,
protection, and support to her.
So what I would do
is I would dissociate
my conscious awareness,
quickly, into the other world.
And I would put out the call.
Let's say, Regina, you're
coming to me for an empowerment.
And I would say, who is
ready, willing, and able
to come into a
relationship with Regina
to provide her with power,
protection, and support?
Now immediately, something or
someone would step forward.
The frequency with which these
spirits manifest themselves
as animals has given rise
to the term power animal.
And often it's an animal
spirit, like the tiger.
You have special relationship
with tigers, don't you.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>WESSELMAN: Yes, you do.
You see, that is
just something that
was just right over here,
which was obvious to me.
Big cats in general.
>>REGINA: And born in
the year of the tiger.
>>WESSELMAN: All right.
All right.
Now, how did I know that?
Well, you know, it's-- there's
always somebody in attendance
who's sort of letting me
know what's-- you know,
that sort of thing.
Now, it can be incredibly
empowering for a person
to know that there's
a spirit who's
coming into a
relationship with them.
This can be an angelic
experience-- spirit.
It could be an ancestor.
It could be a spirit of
some wise old medicine man
or medicine woman, an
indigenous person, perhaps.
To me, it's amazing how
often Native American spirits
are coming into relationship
with people of Anglo, Hispanic,
African American ancestry,
because these spirits came
to be of service.
And they're still very
much in relationship
with the human sphere.
And they really don't care
all that much about ethnicity.
What they're interested in is
to see if your heart is open.
And when they are
offering to come
into a relationship with
you, this is big time.
And people's lives often
change very quickly
once a helping spirit
has been brought
into a relationship with them.
Shamans are good at doing this.
Our Western physical
doctors, you know,
they'll get better
at it with practice,
but they don't really
know about this yet.
I mean, how many of us go to
our primary care physician
and get an empowerment?
All right.
Now, the second stage of
healing involves diagnosis.
Now, Western doctors are
superb diagnosticians.
They are really good at this.
So are shamans.
But the shaman is dealing
with a more complete deck,
in the sense that
they're also dealing
with the energetic and spiritual
aspects of that individual's
matrix.
Now for the shaman, diagnosis
involves both their expertise,
but it also involves the
shaman's relationship
with certain spirits who are
good at doing diagnostic work.
This, of course, is
known as divination
in indigenous societies,
where the shaman will access
information from the other
side of great meaning
to the person who's come
to them as a client.
When I do this work as
a shamanic practitioner,
I hook up with one of
my spiritual helpers,
one of the ones
who works with me.
And with the
client's permission,
with the individual's
permission,
we journey as a team.
I actually invite the
spirit to possess me.
This is called trance
mediumship, in which I
invite a spirit to come in and
take up residence within me
and we work together as a team.
And we actually journey
into that person's body
looking for the intrusions.
I remember many years
ago, a young woman
was at a workshop I was doing
up in northern California.
And this young woman
was about 20 years old,
and she had
endometriosis already.
Now, as your listeners
are very much aware,
it's-- endometriosis involves
an outgrowth of the lining
of the uterus into the body
cavity, the endometrium.
And with her permission,
I journeyed into her body
to take a look at her uterus.
And what I saw was
very interesting.
I saw a spider clamped
around her uterus.
And the spider was
literally clamped-- now,
a uterus is ordinarily
about that big.
It was clamped around her
uterus and it was squeezing.
And the evagination
of the lining
of uterus out through
the fallopian tubes
into the body cavity
was being caused
by this intrusive element.
I remember another individual
with irritable bowel syndrome.
As I was cruising
inside their colon,
and looking at the inside of
their colon, which ordinarily
is white and sort of pearly,
and gleaming with ridges,
I saw the entire inside
of the colon was moving.
Was in movement.
And when I looked
closely, I saw scorpions.
Little flesh colored
scorpions that
were skittering around,
and stinging, and pinching,
and so forth and so on.
Now that doesn't mean
that individual really
has scorpions in
their intestines,
or a spider around their uterus.
This is just a metaphorical
way, a symbolic way,
of perceiving the
intrusive element.
>>REGINA: Well now,
with that woman,
if you don't mind going
back to the one who
had the spider
around the uterus,
as you looked shamanically
into her life,
into more of the soul
force, et cetera,
do you remember
much about that one?
What was going on in her
life that created this?
>>WESSELMAN: I talked
to her afterwards.
Without-- this is
personal stuff,
and on the risk-- on the
chance that her family might
be listening in, this was
actually a family issue.
And it involved a
lot of negativity
which had been subconsciously,
not consciously,
but subconsciously directed
towards this young girl
by a member of her family
when she became a woman at 14.
She had had painful
menstrual periods ever
since she was 14 years old.
Every time she would get her
monthlies, agonizing pain.
And so this was the issue.
Now what the shaman
does, in this case,
is extract-- that's the
third stage of healing--
once the intrusions
have been perceived,
and it's not difficult
to perceive them
if you know what you're doing.
The intrusions need
to be extracted.
They need to be taken out
of that person's field
and removed.
Now, in traditional
societies, shamans often
use their mouth to do this.
They're called sucking doctors.
All right?
And you may go into a tr-- I've
had the experience in Africa
of going into a
traditional village
and seeing somebody lying flat
on their back with somebody,
and their head clamped
to that person's abdomen,
vigorously sucking away.
And then after about
15 or 20 minutes,
they'll spit something
into their hand.
And you look at this,
and you say, what's that?
And lo and behold,
it's a chicken gizzard,
or a piece of meat or a stone.
And you think the
guy's faking it.
You know, I know what that is.
But in fact, what the shaman has
done is put this in their mouth
as a trap to catch the
intrusion when it comes out.
You know, if you're dealing with
somebody who has lupus or HIV,
the last thing you'd want to
do is suck in at your own body.
>>REGINA: Well that's what
I was just going to ask,
is energetically,
where would that go.
So that's-- they use
this almost as a sponge.
Interesting.
>>WESSELMAN: The shaman is
extracting the energetic aspect
of the intrusive element
out of the person's field.
All right?
They're dealing with it
at the spiritual level,
with their spiritual
helpers on the one hand.
But they're also extracting
the energetic aspect out.
And of course, if you
can see an object,
and the person who's had
the extraction sees that,
this reinforces their
own expectation of cure.
Their own belief that
something has really
been taken out of their body.
And this of course elicits
the well known placebo effect,
which is extraordinarily
powerful.
>>REGINA: Yes it is.
Right.
>>WESSELMAN: All right?
So extraction, the shaman
extracts the illness
causing agent out of
this person's body
using spirits to help them.
And in the case
of the spider, I'm
not real wild about spiders.
I used chopsticks.
All right?
I didn't want to touch it.
So I used spiritual chopsticks.
And I actually went
into her abdomen
with these spiritual chopsticks
and very carefully pried it
off her uterus.
And then I kind of held it out,
and one of my spirit helpers
ate it.
This is extraction work.
And all of us who have had
extraction work done often
have extraordinary responses.
I had an extraction
done on my shoulder
once for chronic tendinitis.
It had been bothering
me for years.
I had one extraction.
And within two weeks, it was
gone, and it's never come back.
You know, without any
medical intervention.
This woman down
in Topanga Canyon
did an extraction for me.
And pulled this thing
out of my shoulder,
and my shoulder healed.
The harmony was restored.
>>REGINA: And this
makes perfect sense.
People who are still
looking at life
from a very linear, third
dimensional point of view,
this can be difficult if we have
only one aspect or dimension
to our being.
There are doctors for that.
But if we understand that we
are multidimensional creatures
and we have aspects of
ourselves living in these hyper
spatial or other dimensional
areas with its own reality
energetically, this
makes perfect sense.
>>WESSELMAN: Yes.
Well, it's a
different perspective.
And in the West, we're
very objective in the way
in which we define reality.
But when you
understand that there
are objective levels of
reality and subjective levels
of reality, our thoughts, our
emotions, and our feelings
are real.
And those subjective
experiences can
have an enormous effect
on the physical body.
I mean, it's given
rise to the whole field
of psychoneuroimmunology,
which is essentially mind body
medicine.
Which is an up and
coming field, and has
been for the last 15 years.
Now, the final element in
healing, in shamanic healing,
involves restoring the
fabric of that person's soul.
It's like if you've got-- let's
say you've got window screens,
and it's summer, and
you've got a torn screen.
You can kill all the
mosquitoes in your room.
You can extract those
intrusive elements
which are in your system.
But unless you repair
the screen, the fabric
of the screen,
there's no guarantee
that these intrusive elements
are not going to return.
So this involves this
mysterious practice
known as soul retrieval.
And soul retrieval is
becoming more and more popular
in the West as more
people become aware
of the power of this
healing modality.
Soul retrieval involves
the shamanic practitioner
essentially hooking up
with their spiritual team
and then going to find those
dissociated parts of the self
to return them to the
person who lost them.
Now, psychologists,
psychiatrists, they
know all about dissociation.
But where do those
dissociated parts go?
See, this falls into
the shaman's domain.
Those dissociated
parts are usually
found in what the Celtic
people called the other world.
Or the spirit world,
or the dream time
of the Australian aboriginals,
which is arranged into layers.
And often those dissociated
parts of the self
are being taken care of by a
spiritual ally of some sort.
Like a dissociated
part of the self which
has gone into the dream
world may actually
be being taken care
of by an ancestor.
A revered grandparent who
has already crossed over,
who's taking care of that
little girl or that little boy
who had that brutal experience.
And that little boy or
little girl has not returned.
It's still there with
grandma in the dream world.
So the shaman hooks up
with their team of spirits
and finds these
disassociated parts,
and often has to coax them
back into a relationship,
because they may have forgotten
who they were originally
connected to.
In the Pacific Northwest coast,
people who do soul retrieval,
shamans who do soul retrieval,
are often called soul catchers.
And soul catchers
are regarded as being
in a league of their
own as healers.
There may be many
shamans in a village,
but there may not
be anybody who's
really good as a soul catcher.
It's very, very high work.
Its specialty work, and those
people who are good at it
are like national treasures.
Right?
I discovered quite
by accident that I'm
married to a great soul catcher.
This was interesting, because
my wife, Jill Kuykendall,
was working in acute care
rehabilitation in a hospital
here in Sacramento.
And she began to have these
experiences in which there'd
be somebody who'd had open
heart surgery the day before,
or somebody who'd been
a terrible accident, who
was recovering.
And she begin to perceive,
because she's very clairvoyant,
she began to perceive these
interesting visual phenomena,
like a flickering in the
air next to the person who
had heart surgery
the day before.
And it was my wife's job
to get that person out
of bed and walking the
day after their surgery.
And here, this person
would be filled with fear,
with pain, uncertainty,
and my wife
would have to deal with
all these different levels
of this individual to
help them get out of bed
and stand up for the first time.
And there would
be this flickering
next to that person which would
suddenly [SNAP] disappear.
And then suddenly, this person
looks at my wife and says,
what did you do?
And my wife would say,
gee, I'm wondering
how I'm going to chart this.
But she began to perceive
things like this.
And when she came and talked
to me about it, I said,
it sounds to me like you're
doing a kind of soul retrieval.
And so we began to talk
about soul retrieval,
and it began to happen
more and more frequently.
And I became aware of the fact
that her spirits were actually
teaching her.
You know, she wasn't
learning this from me,
she wasn't learning it from
any ordinary reality teacher.
She wasn't learning
it in a workshop.
She was learning it
directly from her spirits.
Well, to make a
long story short,
she's now been in private
practice for over 10 years,
and she has a full time
transpersonal medical practice
in soul restorative
work, in soul retrieval.
>>REGINA: Fabulous.
>>WESSELMAN: People come
from all over the country
to work with her.
You know, the word is out.
There's a great soul
catcher on the west coast.
And you know, the stories
that she comes home with
are absolutely astounding.
Well, I remember when my
books "Spirit Walker,"
"Medicine Maker," and "Vision
Seeker" came out years ago.
It was in the middle '90s.
I think it was in '96 or '97.
Jill was invited to speak at one
of the main HMO lecture series.
They have a seminar
series for visiting people
to come and give talks
about their specialty work.
And they invited Jill to
actually talk down here
in the cancer building
in downtown Sacramento.
And it was one of
these evenings--
>>REGINA: As a spirit catcher?
>>WESSELMAN: On
soul retrieval work.
>>REGINA: This is fabulous.
>>WESSELMAN: On her
soul retrieval work.
Now, it was an evening in July,
it was about 105 in the shade.
There were-- the grasses
were burning somewhere,
and the town was
filled with smoke.
It was like a Wednesday
or Thursday night.
Now, you wouldn't think that
a lot of people would show up.
It was like at 7
o'clock in the evening.
80 people showed up to
hear what she had to say.
And there were all
the white lab coats
in the audience, interested
in what she had to say.
And she talked about her
practice in soul retrieval,
and the kind of
work that she does.
And at the end of her
talk-- it was very well
received-- somebody
approached her and said,
my name is Doctor so and so,
and I'm an anesthesiologist.
And I've been seeing these soul
parts leave all of my practice,
and I've never
known what it was.
And I've never known
what to do about it.
And here's a man
with clairvoyance.
And he was able to see
these globes of light
actually leaving the person
who's in deep anesthesia.
And they're not returning.
And he didn't know
what to do, he
didn't know what
it was, he didn't
know what to do about it.
The videotape that they made
of my wife's presentation,
you know, you can go to the
library and check these out.
Heavily checked out.
I mean, over the
next six months,
that tape was constantly
being checked out and observed
by members of the
medical community.
So the medical community is
becoming aware of the trans
personal aspects of
medicine, and the power.
Now, Larry Dossey, a
close personal friend,
we talk about
this, and he's very
supportive of the work that Jill
does, and the work that I do.
Because he sees
precisely the direction
that we're trying to go in.
We're trying to really
expand the consciousness
of the public at large.
That's part of why I wrote
this little book with Jill,
called "Spirit Medicine," the
work we co-authored together.
And all of this stuff on these
classic levels of illness
and the classic
levels of healing
is laid out very, very nicely.
To give you an example of
how powerful this method is,
there's an exercise that we
do in our workshops which
involves having individuals find
their personal place of power
and healing in the dream world.
We call it the sacred
garden, because you
can do garden work there.
In a nutshell, I
ask people to find
a memory of a place
where they've been,
like Yosemite Valley, or Hawaii.
Someplace where they've been
where they were just blown away
by being there.
And I ask them to
go into that memory,
to go into the
memory of the place,
to really perceive
themselves there.
It's like remembering
the experience.
We have dismember,
we have remember.
And once there, they discover
that the sacred garden,
the place that they've chosen,
operates by four rules.
Everything in the
garden is symbolic
of some aspect of
themselves for their life.
All right?
Everything in the garden
can be communicated
with for greater understanding.
That's like doing divination
work on your own behalf.
You can change the garden.
That's rule number three.
If you don't have a
waterfall in your garden,
you can dream one up.
If you don't have a
pond, the waters of peace
and reconciliation,
you can create one
with your creative imagination.
But the magic comes
with the fourth rule,
because when you add or subtract
something from your garden,
some aspect of you or your
life will change in response.
That's because
everything in your garden
is symbolic of some aspect
of you or your life.
>>REGINA: In a living dynamic.
>>WESSELMAN: Takes you back
to the first principle.
Now many years ago, a woman
came to one of our workshops.
This was just a
one day workshop.
And when she went to her sacred
garden in a drumming journey,
she comes back afterwards,
and she looks very disturbed.
And I said, how'd it go?
And she looks at me, and
said, well, my garden
was not as I remembered it.
She said, my garden is ordered.
It's trimmed.
It's like a little
English garden
with little rose bushes
and a little cottage
where I have tea.
It's my imaginal place.
I used to go there
when I was little girl,
and I used to have adventures
with my friends, the chipmunks
and the squirrels.
I mean, this is a perfect
shamanic experience,
which Western people go
into quite spontaneously.
She said, this time,
when I went to my garden,
the vines were growing
all over everything.
They were strangling the trees,
growing all over the bushes.
The house was covered in vines,
and I could see them growing.
Now, I'm getting
this download, right?
From the folks
upstairs, so to speak.
And without even thinking
about it, I open my fat mouth,
and I said, do you have cancer?
I just blurted out.
And she looks at me with shock.
10 days before,
she'd been diagnosed
with metastatic cancer, a
particularly aggressive kind.
And she was in denial.
She was in the denial phase.
She hadn't even told her family.
And here it just, blurt.
It just comes out.
And she says, what
am I going to do?
And I said, you've come
to the right place.
And I said, one thing
you have to understand
about the shaman's
world is the shaman
is not the one who
does the healing work.
It's the spirits who
work with the shaman.
Shamans never take credit
for the work that they do.
They always say,
oh, I didn't do it.
It's my helpers who
did it at my request.
I suggested that she
go back to her garden,
to her little English
garden, and bring
in a team of spirit helpers.
I suggested spirit gardeners.
You know, I said,
you could bring
in a whole team of
Japanese gardeners.
Have you seen what Japanese
people do to bonsais?
I do bonsai, and when I've
done the bonsai in the spring,
my wife goes [GASP] like
this, because here, I've
just trimmed them within
an inch of their lives.
I said, bring in a team
of spirit gardeners.
Well, she left, and
the minute she left,
she went into healing.
She made that step out of fear
into her own personal healing.
She worked with her
spirit gardeners
for the whole rest
of the weekend.
And at the end of the weekend,
she'd barely made a dent.
She came out every
drumming journey and said,
they're still growing.
They're still growing.
So at the end of the weekend,
I got out my shamanic Rx pack.
And I said, OK.
Journey work twice a day,
three times on Sunday.
Chop vines.
And at that time, it was
before any of my little CDs
had come out with my books,
with drumming and rattling.
So I had her use a CD from
Michael Harner's foundation.
A CD of shamanic drumming.
She went to work, all right?
Twice a day and three
times on Sunday.
And she went to her garden
with her spiritual helpers,
and they chopped vines.
Three months later, I
get an email from her.
She finally tells me
every vine, every shoot,
every sprig is gone.
Her spirit helpers have gotten
every vine out of her garden,
and it's back to normal.
Well, guess what happens next?
She goes to her
oncologist and her cancer
has gone into remission.
And as far as I know,
it hasn't returned.
>>REGINA: Isn't that
just incredible.
>>WESSELMAN: You know, it's
an incredible little story,
and it's a true story.
And it reveals something that my
wife and I have seen repeatedly
over the years.
The real success
stories in healing
involve those
individuals who are
willing to take an active role
in their own healing process.
Those individuals who are
willing to take responsibility
for their own healing.
This is where the
success stories lie.
And this is where the shamanic
practitioner can work one
on one with a client to
really help empower them,
diagnose the problem,
extract the energetic aspect
of the illness.
Because that's
what she was doing.
That's what she was doing.
And then restore the
fabric of their soul
to prevent reoccurrence.
And she eventually
did go through all
of these phases of her
healing, and as far as I know,
she's still doing great.
>>REGINA: That's
a wonderful story,
and that should be
uplifting to anybody who's
dealing with cancer or any
other disharmonic condition
or disease.
Let's-- before we wrap this
up, this is just fabulous,
by the way.
Thank you again.
>>WESSELMAN: You're welcome.
>>REGINA: It's always such
a pleasure meeting with you.
Let's talk about how we
work with each other.
How we work with
our children, how
we work in our intimate
relationships, and with family,
coworkers, and friends to
keep each other empowered,
so that we don't have
to live in this way
to begin with, with disease.
>>WESSELMAN: Well, we're
living in an interesting time,
in which there is a widespread
spiritual reawakening going on
in the West.
Now those of us who
are actively involved
in this movement-- I think
of it as the transformational
community.
I mean, this is
who we are, Regina.
I mean, you're making
these wonderful videos
for the transformation
community,
and essentially
creating a crossroad.
A visual and
informational crossroad
in which people
can connect, expand
their conscious awareness,
expand their information base,
expand their sense of who they
are, and what we're doing here,
and what this is all about.
I mean, this is really about
the great mystery, isn't it?
You know, where
did we come from?
What are we doing here?
And where are we going?
What is our destiny, our
purpose in being here?
As we move into and
become who and what
we're supposed to become,
it affects those people
who are close to us.
It's just no way
it's not going to,
because you're sitting
across from me,
but you're sitting in
my energetic field.
You know, the dense
part of my field
extends out about three
feet, and so does yours.
But it extends out
considerably further than that.
And so, when we're sitting
in an office, where we're
sitting watching television,
when we're sitting
at dinner with our families,
when we're commuting to work
with friends and
coworkers, they're
going to be affected simply
by being in our field.
And the conversations-- I
have the most incredible
conversations on airplanes.
>>REGINA: I believe
that [LAUGHS]
>>WESSELMAN: You know, I will
sit down next to some man
on an airplane, and
here's this guy.
Here I am dressed in
my corduroy jacket,
I-- sort of my
Indiana Jones outfit.
Put my glasses--
>>REGINA: Going
to your next dig.
>>WESSELMAN: --and I'm
looking academic, you know.
I sit down next to this guy
who's wearing a Gucci suit,
and he's got a $2,000 watch,
and maybe $10,000, you know.
And if I can make contact
with him, all right?
Sometimes people don't
like to make contact,
because everybody's
sort of jammed in,
so everybody's in
everybody else's territory.
I'll say hi, Hank Wesselman.
They'll say, hi, [MUMBLES].
If I can make contact with
them, usually the second thing
we reveal about ourselves
is what we do for living.
All right?
So this man reveals
he's a doctor.
He works in glass and
steel surroundings,
he's one of the
gods in our society.
A lot of physicians regard
themselves very highly,
like deities, all right?
Right.
And he tells me a little
bit about his work.
And then I tell him what I do.
I tell him I'm an
anthropologist,
and I go off to East Africa,
and I dig in the desert,
finding the earliest
bones of our ancestors,
working with tribal
people, working on Safari
for months at a time
in a Safari camp.
[SNAP] I've got him.
I've got him.
>>REGINA: You are Indiana Jones.
No. [LAUGHS]
>>WESSELMAN: So,
what happens is then,
I very carefully start
moving this towards the fact
that I've met
traditional healers
among the indigenous people.
And I'll tell him
a couple of stories
to see if he's interested.
And before you know
it, we're having
a couple of Bloody
Marys together
and we're becoming friends.
We're exchanging business
cards, and I'm affecting him.
I'm affecting him, and
he's going to take my card,
and he's going to
see my website.
And he's going to
go to my website,
and he's going to see my books.
And he's going to
say, hmm, maybe I'll
read this book,
"Spirit Medicine."
Here's a man on the
inside of the system.
A man in a position of
power inside the system.
Often, with my students at
the community colleges where
I teach, I teach a class
called "Magic, Witchcraft
and Religion," in
which I take the sons
and daughters of our
esteemed citizens,
and I completely
turn them inside out.
And by the time they
emerge from my class,
they've got a completely
different view of who they are,
what they're doing here,
and what this is all about.
They've experienced
authentic initiation.
Well, initiation
is very important,
because most of
these young people
are coming out of adolescence,
they're going into adulthood,
they're looking to be initiated.
OK?
And they respond to the
kind of man that I am.
The way in which
I present myself.
The way in which I dress.
They'll see some
little old African bead
I'm wearing around my neck, and
they'll go, ooh, what's that?
That sort of thing.
I do that for their benefit.
When they come out of my
class, they're different.
They're different.
I-- you know, they pay me
so little in these community
colleges.
I've come to regard it
as my community service.
And I've been doing it for
years, because I love doing it.
This is another way in which
we change society at large.
So I just do it one
person at a time,
or a workshop group at a time.
These people go home
to their families,
and they talk about
what they experienced
in Dr. Hank's class.
Or in Hank Wesselman's workshop.
And their families are just
listening to these experiences,
or these things that
I've been telling them,
and before you know it, they're
reading my little books.
Things are changing,
and they're happening--
it's happening at
the grassroots level.
I mean, that's where
I feel comfortable.
I also do conferences.
I sometimes speak for
1,000 people at a shot,
sometimes 5,000 people.
But I prefer working
with small groups,
because there's that
personal element.
There's that connection
at the heart level
that gets established.
And this is very, very
nourishing, very nurturing.
And we're looking for
that in our society.
We're looking for that sense
of connection, community.
>>REGINA: Definitely.
Because people are
beginning-- they
can certainly feel the hole.
They can feel the
parts that are missing,
and I think that's
driving people
toward the need to
explore further.
And I think it requires a
certain amount of boldness,
too.
Often people have information,
they have innate abilities,
they can see, for
example, and yet
are afraid of being labeled
or being made fun of.
And so, often,
many people I know
who are really very
talented in these ways,
are afraid to speak up and
say what they can see and know
with a stranger on an
airplane, for example, for fear
of being ridiculed or
rejected on some level.
So might boldness
be a part of this?
>>WESSELMAN: Yeah,
I used to work
at the University
of Colorado Museum,
for a man named John Roener.
He was a wonderful,
wonderful man.
He was a real-- he
was a medicine man.
He was involved in training
Native American people
to go back to their communities
and create cultural centers.
That's what he was
doing while I was there.
He used to look at me,
and he used to say,
Hank, the most important
thing is to have courage.
Because that's what
makes all the difference.
When you have that courage
to make that first step
and engage somebody, you're set.
You're off.
That's what it's all about.
You know, we all came
to be of service.
And part of my work
is helping people
discover what their service is.
How they are to be of service.
How they can contribute
to the greater good.
The indigenous people, they have
a ritual comprehension almost,
of order and balance.
And they understand that
every thought that we think,
every word that we speak,
every action we take,
every relationship we engage
in, every feeling that we feel,
contributes either to the
greater good of the universe,
or to its suffering.
And our job as human beings,
knowing this, you see,
is to pursue goals
and life ways that
contribute to the greater good.
That contribute to the beauty,
to the balance, to the order.
They also know
that every creature
has tasks appropriate
to their being.
And only when those tasks are
performed in the right way,
you know, grizzly bears
grizzle, and woodpeckers
do what they do, and the
penguins, we know what they do,
having seen "March
of the Penguins."
Only when those
tasks are performed
in the right way, only
then can the universe
continue to function in
life-enhancing ways for all
of us.
If any of us fail in our
tasks, everyone suffers.
So knowing this, I see
my contribution, really,
and the contribution that I make
when I'm working with my wife,
as trying to create balance.
Trying to create
harmony where we go
and in the work that we do.
This is very important.
>>REGINA: Thank you.
>>WESSELMAN: Thank you
for having me. [CHUCKLES]
>>REGINA: If you haven't
already seen our first interview
with Hank, I'd
suggest you watch it
to have a greater understanding
of this wonderful man's
journey.
If you're intrigued and
would like to dig deeper,
you can click to buy
his trilogy of books,
called "Spirit Walker,"
"Medicine Maker,"
and "Vision Seeker."
Until next time,
thanks for watching.